---
title: "Lightning Talks and Buckets"
date: 2018-10-02
draft: false
author: "Owen"
tags:
  - conferences
image:
description: ""
toc: 
---
## PyCon UK 2016

At [PyCon UK 2016](https://2016.pyconuk.org), I became annoyed.

I was fully part of the organising team for the first time and we had
spent part of our opening morning\'s session introducing lightning
talks: explaining how they were an ideal way for new speakers to begin
their speaking career.

At the time, the system we used for lightning talks was the same as
everyone else. We had a flipchart at reception and, if you wanted to
give a talk, you wrote your name and a title on the flipchart, starting
at the top.

But, when I walked down to reception at the end of the introduction, the
flipchart was already full with far more submissions than we could
possibly hope to cover. Anyone who had heard about them for the first
time two minutes earlier had no chance of getting on stage.

The same happened the following day and each day of the conference. The
lightning talk sessions filled up with the same old faces who knew the
system and arrived early each morning to get their name on the list.

The inner eight-year old within me cried out, \"That\'s not fair!\" and
something had to be done.

## PyCon UK 2017

For [PyCon UK 2017](https://2017.pyconuk.org), I decided to do something
about it. I felt there were two issues to resolve:

### New Speakers

If we were serious about encouraging new speakers, we had to bias
the system in their favour somehow. It was unreasonable to expect
newcomers to compete for speaking slots with those that had been
coming to the conference for years.

### Talk Selection

The flipchart system meant that talks were selected on a first-come,
first-served basis so that, even if you were an experienced speaker,
you had no chance of giving a talk unless you were prepared to get
out of bed early and get your name at the top of the list.

What about anyone who had an idea during the day? What about anyone
who couldn\'t get to the venue for 8 AM?

And so, I came up with the bucket system. We replaced the flipchart with
two buckets and a set of index cards. If you wanted to submit a talk
proposal, you took an index card, wrote your name and a title on it and
dropped it in a bucket. One of the buckets was for new speakers and the
other for experienced speakers.

The buckets appeared at reception each morning and stayed there until
lunch. During lunch we drew cards, half from one bucket and half from
the other, and posted them on the flipchart at reception.

## PyCon UK 2018

No system is ever perfect and we tweaked things slightly for [PyCon UK
2018](https://2018.pyconuk.org).

Firstly, we\'d had a lot of questions about the definition of an
\"experienced speaker\" in 2017 and we\'d changed those descriptions
part way through the conference.

The two buckets were now for \"New Speakers\" and \"Everyone Else.\" We
opened with that description for 2018 and it worked much better with far
less confusion about who should use which bucket.

We also realised that the index cards would be extremely useful for the
lightning talks chair. In 2017, we\'d simply left them at reception all
day but, in 2018, we ensured that the chair, Mark Smith, had the cards
in the correct order well before the session started. If there was
anything he couldn\'t read, was unsure how to pronounce or anything else
he needed to know, he had time to find the speaker, clarify things and
make notes on the cards. It worked well and we\'ll definitely repeat
that next year.

We do have one more issue to consider and improve: the lightining talk
session is always at the end of the day and has a fixed end time because
of our agreement with the venue. Given the possibility of previous
sessions over-running and the general uncertainty of how long lightning
talks (and handover between them) might take, it\'s tricky to estimate
how many talks we\'ll need.

In 2017 and 2018, we deliberately drew more cards than we thought we\'d
need. There are always far more submissions than we can possibly fit and
it would be a shame to finish the session early simply because we drew
too few cards. In many ways, this is no different to the old flipchart
system where, the further down the list you were, the less likely it
became that you would get on stage but you didn\'t know for definite
until the session itself.

However, this caused some issues in 2018. Some potential speakers had
put effort into preparing their talks but the session ended before they
were called. That\'s not ideal and we\'ll need to improve how we handle
that aspect for 2019. I have a few ideas in mind, so watch out for
further tweaks!

## Elsewhere

I\'ve been delighted to see that the idea has spread. At the time of
writing, I\'m aware of five other conferences that have used similar
systems for their lightning talk submission and selection.

I\'ve made an attempt to capture where the system has been used and how
the idea was introduced. If you\'re interested, it\'s available at
[github](https://github.com/meatballs/bucket-brigade).

You might also want to read [Alex Chan\'s
article](https://alexwlchan.net/2017/10/lightning-talks/) which was
written shortly after the 2017 conference.
