---
title: "Everyone Pays to Attend PyCon UK"
date: 2022-09-07
draft: false
author: "Owen"
tags:
  - conferences
image:
description: ""
toc: 
---
PyCon UK has a long-standing policy that everyone pays to attend -
speakers, organisers, everyone. That often causes some consterntation
with reactions like \"I have to pay to speak at PyCon UK?!!\" or \"If I
volunteer to help, I have to pay the same as someone who has done
nothing?\"

I\'ve been party to many discussions on whether the policy should change
and these are my thoughts on the subject\... (TLDR: it shouldn\'t).

Firstly, it\'s worth mentioning that PyCon UK has a financial assistance
programme that is open to anyone. If, for whatever reason, somebody
feels they need some funding to attend the conference, they can apply.
When we consider those applications, one of the factors we take into
account is the amount of voluntary effort the applicant is providing to
the event - the more effort, the more likely the application is to
succeed.

Secondly, let\'s consider for a moment what the effect of changing the
policy might be. For example, if we offered a free ticket to speakers,
how might our organisers feel? Should we then also provide a free ticket
to each of those? What about our volunteers? Should somebody who chairs
a session or two also qualify?

Given how many of our attendees volunteer at least some of their time
and effort, it becomes almost impossible to decide where to draw the
line.

Instead, my view is that the Financial Assistance programme is the
fairest solution we have. It may not be perfect, but it\'s better than
any of the alternatives.
